# Term Project 4190.409 Compilers Fall 2019

# Phase 1: Scanning

In this first phase, your job is to implement a scanner for the SnuPL/1 language as specified in the
term project overview.
The input to the scanner is a character stream. The output of the scanner is a stream of tokens. The

scanner must correctly recognize and tokenize keywords, identifiers, numbers, operators(assignment, binary and relational), comments, and the syntax elements of the language. The (^)
scanner should scan the input until the end of the input character stream is reached or an error is
detected. The language specification contains the complete EBNF of SnuPL/1 and is available on
eTL.
The scanner must scan but ignore white-space and single-line comments. Character constants
enclosed in single quotes and strings (enclosed in double quotes) must be recognized as a whole and
returned to the parser as a single token with the token value set to the single character/character
sequence. Make sure to properly scan escape sequences. Numbers must also be scanned as a whole
and returned to the parser as a single token. The conversion string → number is done in the parser(i.e., you should simple return the lexeme making up the number).
We provide a skeleton for a scanner/parser framework so that you can focus on the interesting
parts. In addition, we also provide a full working example for “SnuPL/-1” that shows you how to
use the framework (the EBNF for SnuPL/-1 is provided below).
The scanner skeleton can be found in the files snuplc/src/scanner.[h/cpp]. In its unmodified form,
the scanner scans SnuPL/-1.
The header file first defines the token types (EToken); two corresponding data structures(ETokenName and ETokenStr) are located in the C++ file. Here, you will need to add additional (^)
tokens to implement SnuPL/0. ETokenName is used to print the token type only; ETokenStr prints
the token name along with the lexeme. The elements of ETokenStr are fed to printf, so you can print
the lexeme by inserting a ‘%s’ placeholder somewhere in that string.
The token class (CToken) is fully implemented and functional, you do not have to modify it. The
scanner (CScanner) is also fully functional, but only recognizes SnuPL/-1. You will need to modify
the function CToken* Scanner::Scan() to accept all possible tokens of SnuPL/1.
The sources also contain a simple test program for the scanner. It creates a scanner instance andrepeatedly calls CScanner::Get() to retrieve and print the next token until the end of file is reached.
To build the test program, run the following command in the snuplc/ directory
**snuplc $ make test_scanner**
You can invoke the test_scanner with a file name as an argument:
**snuplc $ ./test_scanner ../test/scanner/test01.mod**


In the directory test/scanner/ you can find a number of test files for the scanner. We advise you to
create your own test cases to test special cases; we have our own set of test files to test (and grade)
your scanner. In the directory snupl/reference/ you will find one possible working implementationfor your reference.

Hints: the first phase is pretty straight-forward to implement. Two points are noteworthy:

- error recovery: unrecognized lexemes should be handled by returning a tUndefined token
- with the illegal lexeme or a custom error message as its attributehandling of comment and whitespace: consume all whitespace and comments in the scanner
    (i.e., do not return a token for whitespace or comment)
Materials to submit:
- • source code of the scanner (use Doxygen-style comments)a brief report describing your implementation of the scanner (PDF)
(the report is almost as important as your code. Make sure to put sufficient effort into it!)
Submission:
- • the deadline for the first phase issubmission instructions will be detailed on eTL **Tuesday, September 24, 2019 at 14:**.

Do not hesitate to ask questions in class/on eTL; implementing a compiler is not an easy task. Also,
start as soon as possible; if you wait until a few days before the deadline we cannot help you much
and you may not be able to finish in time.
Happy coding!

**Appendix: EBNF Syntax Definition of SnuPL/-**
_module_ = _statSequence ".".
digit_ = "0".."9".
_letter_ = "a".."z".
_factOp_ = "*" | "/"
_termOp_ = "+" | "-"
_relOp_ = "=" | "#"
_factor_ = _digit_ | "(" _expression_ ")".
_term_ = _factor_ { _factOp factor_ }.
_simpleexpr_ = _term_ { _termOp term_ }.
_expression_ = _simpleexpr_ [ _relOp simplexpr_ ].
_assignment_ = _letter_ ":=" _expression_.
_statement_ = _assignment_.
_statSequence_ = [ _statement_ { ";" _statement_ } ].

_whitespace_ = { " _" |_ \n }+.


